doc/source/setups.rst, before:

.. _setups:

Configuring NICOS: Setups
=========================

-----------
Setup files
-----------

NICOS supports the concept of different instrument setups.  Not all devices that
can be used at an instrument will be present all the time, so they need not be
loaded.

A specific set of devices (and commands, which supports the notion of
specialized commands) is collected in a "setup file"[#f1]_.

The syntax of the setup files is python-like.

Each setup is available by the filename without the '.py' extension, e.g. the
'test' setup is located in 'test.py' file.

A setup named ``system``, if it exists, is always loaded by NICOS.

A setup file can consist of the following entries, all of which are optional
except the **description** entry:

``description``
   A string describing the setup in detail. The entry will be displayed to the
   user in client interfaces, if the setup is not in one of the following
   groups:

   * ``'lowlevel'``
   * ``'special'``
   * ``'configdata'``

   Example::

      description = 'triple-axis measurement setup'

.. note::

   It's a good pratice to add the description to every setup file and device.

.. _setup_group:

``group``
   A string giving the group of the setup.  The following groups are
   recognized:

   * ``basic`` means a basic setup for the instrument, of which only one should
     be loaded (e.g. "twoaxis" or "threeaxis").  These setups can be presented
     to the user.
   * ``optional`` means an optional setup, of which as many as needed can be
     loaded.  These setups can be presented to the user for multiple selection.
     This is the default.
   * ``plugplay`` means an optional setup that is automatically detected by
     NICOS when the corresponding hardware (usually sample environment) is
     present.
   * ``lowlevel`` means a low-level setup, which will be included by others,
     but should not be presented to users.

   * ``configdata`` means that the setup does not contain devices or includes,
     but only configuration data (in the form of lists, dictionaries, etc).  See
     :ref:`config-setups` below.

   * ``special`` means that the setup is not a setup of instrument devices,
     but configures e.g. a NICOS service.  For each service, there is one
     special setup (e.g. "cache", "poller", "daemon").

   Example::

      group = 'optional'

``includes``
   A list of names of setups that this one requires to be loaded.  Using this
   function, setups can be constructed very modularly, usually without
   duplicating the entry for any device.

   Example::

      includes = ['base', 'mono1', 'sample', 'detector']

``sysconfig``
   A dictionary with basic system configuration values.  See :ref:`sysconfig`
   below.  This is generally only put in one very basic setup file that is
   included from other, more high-level files.

``devices``
   A dictionary of devices, where the key is the device name and the value is a
   device definition, see :ref:`deviceentries` below.

.. _setup_modules:

``modules``
   A list of Python module names where additional user commands are loaded from.

   Example::

      modules = ['commands.standard', 'commands.taco']

``display_order``
   An integer (range 0-100) that determines how the list of loaded setups is
   sorted when displayed in the GUI device list.

   The default is 50.  To sort a setup before the default, use smaller numbers,
   to sort them after the default, use larger numbers.  Setups with the same
   number are sorted alphabetically by setup name.

   Example::

      display_order = 20

``alias_config``
   A dictionary of device aliases that the current setup would like to change.

   This is preferred to setting aliases in the ``startupcode`` since NICOS will
   combine this information from loaded setups and can make decisions how to set
   the aliases.

   The format is the following::

       alias_config = {
           'T':  {'T_ccr12':   100},
           'Ts': {'T_ccr12_A': 100, 'T_ccr12_B':  50},
       }

   It maps the name of the alias device (which must exist in the setup) to a
   dictionary of the desired alias targets and the priority to use them.
   If multiple loaded setups want to change the same alias, the target with
   the highest priority is selected.

   Regarding the choice of the priority numbers:

   - below 0: fallbacks (should normally not be used, but sometimes a (virtual
     dummy fallback) device is needed
   - around 0: instrument default (normally always there, fallback)
   - around 100: 'outermost' optional stuff (magnets, ovens, ...)
   - around 200: 'spezialised' optional stuff (carrying cryostats, extra
     rotational stages)
   - around 300: 'innermost' optional stuff (cci3he/4he inserts, cold-end-sample
     rotation,...)

   If more than one choice is offered by a setupfile, they should have different
   priorities (with the less common/sensible option getting a smaller number).


``startupcode``
   A string of Python code that is executed after the setup file has been
   processed and the devices that are marked for automatic creation have been
   created.

   Example::

      startupcode = '''
      AddEnvironment(T, Ts)
      '''

``extended``
   A dictionary, reserved for future use.

   Example::

      extended = dict(dynamic_loaded = True)

.. todo::

   document "extended" more once we have use for it. PANDA uses it now !!!


.. _deviceentries:

-------------------------------------
Entries in the ``devices`` dictionary
-------------------------------------

A device definition consists of a call like ``device(classname, parameters)``.
The class name is fully qualified (i.e., includes the package/module name).  See
the :doc:`class documentation <classes/index>` for the existing device classes.
The parameters are given as keyword arguments.  Here are some example
``devices`` entries::

   devices = dict(
       p   = device('devices.taco.AnalogInput',
                    description = 'detector gas pressure',
                    tacodevice = 'mira/ccr/pressure',
                    unit = 'bar'),

       mth_motor = device('devices.taco.Motor',
                          tacodevice = 'mira/motor/mth',
                          lowlevel = True,
                          unit = 'deg'),

       mth_coder = device('devices.taco.Coder',
                          tacodevice = 'mira/coder/mth',
                          lowlevel = True,
                          unit = 'deg'),

       mth = device('devices.generic.Axis',
                    description = 'Monochromator theta angle',
                    motor = 'mth_motor',
                    coder = 'mth_coder',
                    abslimits = (0, 100),
                    userlimits = (0, 50),
                    precision = 0.01),
   )

For example, an instrument with varying sample environment could have two setup
files, ``cryostat`` and ``oven``, where both include a ``base`` file that could
contain the monochromator, sample table and detector that always stay the same.

On startup, an empty setup is initialized by NICOS.  The user then loads a setup
using the ``NewSetup('modulename')`` command.  Each time the ``NewSetup``
command is used, the previous setup is unloaded and the created devices are
destroyed.  When more setups need to be loaded at the same time, the
``AddSetup('modulename')`` command can be used.


.. _sysconfig:

----------------------------
The ``sysconfig`` dictionary
----------------------------

The "sysconfig" is a dictionary with basic system configuration values.
This is generally only put in one very basic setup file that is included from
other, more high-level files.

Example::

    sysconfig = dict(
        cache = 'mira1',
        instrument = 'mira',
        experiment = 'Exp',
        notifiers = ['email', 'smser'],
        datasinks = ['conssink', 'filesink', 'dmnsink'],
    )

The possible entries for the ``sysconfig`` dictionary are:

.. data:: cache

   A string giving the hostname of the cache server (or ``hostname:port``, if
   the cache runs on a port other than 14869).  If this is omitted, no caching
   will be available.

   See also :ref:`cache`.

.. data:: instrument

   The name of the instrument device, defined somewhere in a ``devices``
   dictionary.  The class for this device must be
   :class:`nicos.devices.instrument.Instrument` or an instrument-specific subclass.

.. data:: experiment

   ``'Exp'`` or ``None``.  If ``'Exp'``, a device of this name must be defined
   somewhere in a ``devices`` dictionary.  The class for this device must be
   :class:`nicos.devices.experiment.Experiment` or an instrument-specific
   subclass.

.. data:: datasinks

   A list of names of :ref:`data_sinks`, i.e. special devices that process
   measured data.  These devices must be defined somewhere in a ``devices``
   dictionary.

   A 'data sink' can work as a data storage device, writing the measured data in
   a special format, read by data analysis software.

   The other type of data sink is the support to transport the measured data to
   the different components of NICOS to display the data of the measurement.

   Datasinks lists from different loaded setups are merged.

.. data:: notifiers

   A list of names of "notifiers", i.e. special devices that can notify the user
   or instrument responsibles via various channels (e.g. email).  These devices
   must be defined somewhere in a ``devices`` dictionary and be of class
   :class:`nicos.devices.notifiers.Notifier` or a subclass.

   Notifiers lists from different loaded setups are merged.


.. _config-setups:

--------------------
Configuration setups
--------------------

The setup kind ``configdata`` marks setups that do not contain devices,
includes, startupcode etc., but arbitrary configuration data (in the form of
Python lists, dictionaries, etc) that is used by other setups.  This is helpful
if this data is autogenerated, or generated by a GUI tool.  It is also helpful
when the data is used by devices in multiple setups, to avoid duplication.

The setup cannot be loaded as usual, but its data can be included in other
setups using the ``configdata()`` function that is provided when setups are
read.

.. function:: configdata(value)

   This function is available in setups and returns a value from a configuration
   setup.  The argument must be ``'setupname.valuename'``.

   It is typically used like this::

      # setup file "config_det.py"

      group = 'configdata'
      DET_CONFIG = {
          ...  # some configuration data
      }

      # setup file "det.py"

      group = 'lowlevel'

      devices = dict(
          det = device('my.instrument.Detector',
                       # here the DET_CONFIG dictionary is loaded from
                       # config_det.py and inserted as a parameter
                       config = configdata('config_det.DET_CONFIG'),
                       # other parameters...
                      ),
      )

.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#f1] A Python module in the subdirectory ``setups`` of the site-specific
         NICOS root directory.

Commit message:

DOC: Add documentation of 'excludes' directive in setup files
Change-Id: I010ab4478bfe4fd92900c56d1999f4ef45d74fb7
Reviewed-on: https://forge.frm2.tum.de/review/12552
Tested-by: JenkinsCodeReview <bjoern_pedersen@frm2.tum.de>
Reviewed-by: Jens Krueger <jens.krueger@frm2.tum.de>
Reviewed-by: Enrico Faulhaber <enrico.faulhaber@frm2.tum.de>

doc/source/setups.rst, after:

.. _setups:

Configuring NICOS: Setups
=========================

-----------
Setup files
-----------

NICOS supports the concept of different instrument setups.  Not all devices that
can be used at an instrument will be present all the time, so they need not be
loaded.

A specific set of devices (and commands, which supports the notion of
specialized commands) is collected in a "setup file"[#f1]_.

The syntax of the setup files is python-like.

Each setup is available by the filename without the '.py' extension, e.g. the
'test' setup is located in 'test.py' file.

A setup named ``system``, if it exists, is always loaded by NICOS.

A setup file can consist of the following entries, all of which are optional
except the **description** entry:

``description``
   A string describing the setup in detail. The entry will be displayed to the
   user in client interfaces, if the setup is not in one of the following
   groups:

   * ``'lowlevel'``
   * ``'special'``
   * ``'configdata'``

   Example::

      description = 'triple-axis measurement setup'

.. note::

   It's a good pratice to add the description to every setup file and device.

.. _setup_group:

``group``
   A string giving the group of the setup.  The following groups are
   recognized:

   * ``basic`` means a basic setup for the instrument, of which only one should
     be loaded (e.g. "twoaxis" or "threeaxis").  These setups can be presented
     to the user.
   * ``optional`` means an optional setup, of which as many as needed can be
     loaded.  These setups can be presented to the user for multiple selection.
     This is the default.
   * ``plugplay`` means an optional setup that is automatically detected by
     NICOS when the corresponding hardware (usually sample environment) is
     present.
   * ``lowlevel`` means a low-level setup, which will be included by others,
     but should not be presented to users.

   * ``configdata`` means that the setup does not contain devices or includes,
     but only configuration data (in the form of lists, dictionaries, etc).  See
     :ref:`config-setups` below.

   * ``special`` means that the setup is not a setup of instrument devices,
     but configures e.g. a NICOS service.  For each service, there is one
     special setup (e.g. "cache", "poller", "daemon").

   Example::

      group = 'optional'

``includes``
   A list of names of setups that this one requires to be loaded.  Using this
   function, setups can be constructed very modularly, usually without
   duplicating the entry for any device.

   Example::

      includes = ['base', 'mono1', 'sample', 'detector']

``excludes``
   A list of names of setups that must **not** be loaded if this setup file
   should be loaded. If one of this is loaded and you try to load this file,
   an error message will be generated.

   Possible uses of this directive:

   - setups which contain the same device in different configurations
   - setups that would disturb the current setup when loaded

   Example::

      excludes = ['eulerian_huber', 'eulerian_newport']

``sysconfig``
   A dictionary with basic system configuration values.  See :ref:`sysconfig`
   below.  This is generally only put in one very basic setup file that is
   included from other, more high-level files.

``devices``
   A dictionary of devices, where the key is the device name and the value is a
   device definition, see :ref:`deviceentries` below.

.. _setup_modules:

``modules``
   A list of Python module names where additional user commands are loaded from.

   Example::

      modules = ['commands.standard', 'commands.taco']

``display_order``
   An integer (range 0-100) that determines how the list of loaded setups is
   sorted when displayed in the GUI device list.

   The default is 50.  To sort a setup before the default, use smaller numbers,
   to sort them after the default, use larger numbers.  Setups with the same
   number are sorted alphabetically by setup name.

   Example::

      display_order = 20

``alias_config``
   A dictionary of device aliases that the current setup would like to change.

   This is preferred to setting aliases in the ``startupcode`` since NICOS will
   combine this information from loaded setups and can make decisions how to set
   the aliases.

   The format is the following::

       alias_config = {
           'T':  {'T_ccr12':   100},
           'Ts': {'T_ccr12_A': 100, 'T_ccr12_B':  50},
       }

   It maps the name of the alias device (which must exist in the setup) to a
   dictionary of the desired alias targets and the priority to use them.
   If multiple loaded setups want to change the same alias, the target with
   the highest priority is selected.

   Regarding the choice of the priority numbers:

   - below 0: fallbacks (should normally not be used, but sometimes a (virtual
     dummy fallback) device is needed
   - around 0: instrument default (normally always there, fallback)
   - around 100: 'outermost' optional stuff (magnets, ovens, ...)
   - around 200: 'spezialised' optional stuff (carrying cryostats, extra
     rotational stages)
   - around 300: 'innermost' optional stuff (cci3he/4he inserts, cold-end-sample
     rotation,...)

   If more than one choice is offered by a setupfile, they should have different
   priorities (with the less common/sensible option getting a smaller number).


``startupcode``
   A string of Python code that is executed after the setup file has been
   processed and the devices that are marked for automatic creation have been
   created.

   Example::

      startupcode = '''
      AddEnvironment(T, Ts)
      '''

``extended``
   A dictionary, reserved for future use.

   Example::

      extended = dict(dynamic_loaded = True)

.. todo::

   document "extended" more once we have use for it. PANDA uses it now !!!


.. _deviceentries:

-------------------------------------
Entries in the ``devices`` dictionary
-------------------------------------

A device definition consists of a call like ``device(classname, parameters)``.
The class name is fully qualified (i.e., includes the package/module name).  See
the :doc:`class documentation <classes/index>` for the existing device classes.
The parameters are given as keyword arguments.  Here are some example
``devices`` entries::

   devices = dict(
       p   = device('devices.taco.AnalogInput',
                    description = 'detector gas pressure',
                    tacodevice = 'mira/ccr/pressure',
                    unit = 'bar'),

       mth_motor = device('devices.taco.Motor',
                          tacodevice = 'mira/motor/mth',
                          lowlevel = True,
                          unit = 'deg'),

       mth_coder = device('devices.taco.Coder',
                          tacodevice = 'mira/coder/mth',
                          lowlevel = True,
                          unit = 'deg'),

       mth = device('devices.generic.Axis',
                    description = 'Monochromator theta angle',
                    motor = 'mth_motor',
                    coder = 'mth_coder',
                    abslimits = (0, 100),
                    userlimits = (0, 50),
                    precision = 0.01),
   )

For example, an instrument with varying sample environment could have two setup
files, ``cryostat`` and ``oven``, where both include a ``base`` file that could
contain the monochromator, sample table and detector that always stay the same.

On startup, an empty setup is initialized by NICOS.  The user then loads a setup
using the ``NewSetup('modulename')`` command.  Each time the ``NewSetup``
command is used, the previous setup is unloaded and the created devices are
destroyed.  When more setups need to be loaded at the same time, the
``AddSetup('modulename')`` command can be used.


.. _sysconfig:

----------------------------
The ``sysconfig`` dictionary
----------------------------

The "sysconfig" is a dictionary with basic system configuration values.
This is generally only put in one very basic setup file that is included from
other, more high-level files.

Example::

    sysconfig = dict(
        cache = 'mira1',
        instrument = 'mira',
        experiment = 'Exp',
        notifiers = ['email', 'smser'],
        datasinks = ['conssink', 'filesink', 'dmnsink'],
    )

The possible entries for the ``sysconfig`` dictionary are:

.. data:: cache

   A string giving the hostname of the cache server (or ``hostname:port``, if
   the cache runs on a port other than 14869).  If this is omitted, no caching
   will be available.

   See also :ref:`cache`.

.. data:: instrument

   The name of the instrument device, defined somewhere in a ``devices``
   dictionary.  The class for this device must be
   :class:`nicos.devices.instrument.Instrument` or an instrument-specific subclass.

.. data:: experiment

   ``'Exp'`` or ``None``.  If ``'Exp'``, a device of this name must be defined
   somewhere in a ``devices`` dictionary.  The class for this device must be
   :class:`nicos.devices.experiment.Experiment` or an instrument-specific
   subclass.

.. data:: datasinks

   A list of names of :ref:`data_sinks`, i.e. special devices that process
   measured data.  These devices must be defined somewhere in a ``devices``
   dictionary.

   A 'data sink' can work as a data storage device, writing the measured data in
   a special format, read by data analysis software.

   The other type of data sink is the support to transport the measured data to
   the different components of NICOS to display the data of the measurement.

   Datasinks lists from different loaded setups are merged.

.. data:: notifiers

   A list of names of "notifiers", i.e. special devices that can notify the user
   or instrument responsibles via various channels (e.g. email).  These devices
   must be defined somewhere in a ``devices`` dictionary and be of class
   :class:`nicos.devices.notifiers.Notifier` or a subclass.

   Notifiers lists from different loaded setups are merged.


.. _config-setups:

--------------------
Configuration setups
--------------------

The setup kind ``configdata`` marks setups that do not contain devices,
includes, startupcode etc., but arbitrary configuration data (in the form of
Python lists, dictionaries, etc) that is used by other setups.  This is helpful
if this data is autogenerated, or generated by a GUI tool.  It is also helpful
when the data is used by devices in multiple setups, to avoid duplication.

The setup cannot be loaded as usual, but its data can be included in other
setups using the ``configdata()`` function that is provided when setups are
read.

.. function:: configdata(value)

   This function is available in setups and returns a value from a configuration
   setup.  The argument must be ``'setupname.valuename'``.

   It is typically used like this::

      # setup file "config_det.py"

      group = 'configdata'
      DET_CONFIG = {
          ...  # some configuration data
      }

      # setup file "det.py"

      group = 'lowlevel'

      devices = dict(
          det = device('my.instrument.Detector',
                       # here the DET_CONFIG dictionary is loaded from
                       # config_det.py and inserted as a parameter
                       config = configdata('config_det.DET_CONFIG'),
                       # other parameters...
                      ),
      )

.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#f1] A Python module in the subdirectory ``setups`` of the site-specific
         NICOS root directory.
