Stopping / aborting devices and scripts
---------------------------------------

Stop and abort commands come in three flavors:

- As "normal" user commands / Python functions which can be used in both the
  CLI and the GUI client
- As client-specific inputs (i.e. buttons in the GUI).
- As a Watchdog *scriptaction* which is executed when a condition is fulfilled.

The table below gives an overview over the available commands ("--" means that
there is no equivalent):

.. list-table:: Stop and abort commands
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 1
   :align: left

   * - Action
     - User command
     - GUI client
     - CLI client
     - Watchdog scriptaction
   * - Stop the current movement of `dev`
     - :func:`stop(dev) <nicos.commands.device.stop>` or :func:`dev.stop() <nicos.commands.device.stop>`
     - Double-click on `dev` in the 'Devices' tab, then click "Stop"
     - --
     - --
   * - Abort the script after current command
     - :func:`abort() <nicos.commands.basic.abort>`
     - "Script control" → "Stop after this command" OR Black square button
     - /stop → `l`
     - --
   * - Abort the scan after current scan point
     - --
     - "Script control" → "Stop after current scanpoint" OR Black square button
     - /stop → `h`
     - `stop`
   * - Stop all devices and scripts immediately
     - --
     - "Script control" → "Immediate Stop" OR Stop button
     - /stop → `s`
     - `immediatestop`

The following sections contain detailed descriptions of the items in the
"Action" column:

.. _abort_script_after_current_command:

Abort the script after current command
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All commands queued behind the currently active one are removed from the queue
and are not executed. This concerns both waiting command put there manually
(i.e. by selecting "Queue script" when entering a command while another one is
running) and commands in a script. The currently active command is still
executed, e.g. a moving motor is not stopped.

Abort the scan after current scan point
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A "scan" is a series of counts generated by one of the
:ref:`scan commands <scanning_commands>`. A "scan point" is one of the counts of
the series. Stopping after a scan point means that the script / scan is exited
*only* after a count has finished (and the data is saved). Moves in between
count actions that already started will be completed and followed by the final
count. In all other cases, this action behaves the same way as
:ref:`"Abort the script after current command" <abort_script_after_current_command>`.

Stop all devices and scripts immediately
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This function stops all devices (except for devices which must not be stopped),
aborts the current command and empties the command queue. In other words, this
action brings the instrument into an idle state as fast as possible.
