doc/source/gui/invocation.rst, before:

GUI invocation
==============

The NICOS GUI is invoked with the ``nicos-gui`` script.

Usage of the script::

   nicos-gui [options] [user_name[:password[@host[:port]]]]

The script has several options:

-h, --help                    show the help message and exit
-c file, --config-file file   use ``file`` as the configuration file
-v, --view-only               run in view-only mode

Apart from the options, you can also give an argument: the "connection string"
consisting of  ``user_name``, ``password``, ``host``, and ``port``.

If the "connection string" contains the user_name, password and host, the client
connects automatically on startup, otherwise the user will be asked for missing
parts of the "connection string".

Log file
--------

The NICOS GUI writes a log file with all unhandled tracebacks that are printed
to the console in abbreviation.  The log file can be found in
``~/.config/nicos/log``.

Configuration
-------------

For configuration of the interface please see :ref:`gui-config`.

Commit message:

GUI: add a tunnel option to the client
The client will be able to tunnel its traffice via an ssh connection.
The corresponding options are added. The connect client requests the
password, since it shall not be given by command line or similar.

Change-Id: I7a2fe034858284dafd4845759b54977727d69d3e
Reviewed-on: https://forge.frm2.tum.de/review/16343
Tested-by: JenkinsCodeReview <bjoern_pedersen@frm2.tum.de>
Reviewed-by: Georg Brandl <g.brandl@fz-juelich.de>

doc/source/gui/invocation.rst, after:

GUI invocation
==============

The NICOS GUI is invoked with the ``nicos-gui`` script.

Usage of the script::

   nicos-gui [options] [user_name[:password[@host[:port]]]]

The script has several options:

-h, --help                      show the help message and exit
-c file, --config-file file     use ``file`` as the configuration file
-v, --view-only                 run in view-only mode
-t tunnel, --use-tunnel tunnel  ``tunnel`` string contains ``user_name`` and
                                ``host`` to establish a ssh tunnel:
                                [user_name]@host.

Apart from the options, you can also give an argument: the "connection string"
consisting of  ``user_name``, ``password``, ``host``, and ``port``.

If the "connection string" contains the user_name, password and host, the client
connects automatically on startup, otherwise the user will be asked for missing
parts of the "connection string".

Log file
--------

The NICOS GUI writes a log file with all unhandled tracebacks that are printed
to the console in abbreviation.  The log file can be found in
``~/.config/nicos/log``.

Configuration
-------------

For configuration of the interface please see :ref:`gui-config`.
