doc/source/protocols/daemon.rst, before:

===================
The daemon protocol
===================

Basics
======

The daemon protocol consists of two socket connections: the command connection
and the event connection.  The command connection is used in a request-reply
mode, while the event connection is read-only for the client.

Frame format
------------

**Command connection**

A "request" frame on the command connection begins with the ASCII byte ENQ
(0x5), followed by a 2-byte "command code", and the length of the payload as a
network-order (big-endian) unsigned 32-bit integer.  The payload must be a
serialized Python tuple with the arguments for the command.

A reply frame on the command connection has one of three types: "ok", "error" or
"data".  The first byte selects the type with the ASCII values ACK (0x6), NAK
(0x15) and STX (0x2) respectively.

"ok" frames have no further content; they consist of only one byte.

For "error" and "data" frames, the following four bytes encode the length of the
payload (i.e. frame length excluding first byte and length) as a network-order
unsigned 32-bit integer.

In both cases, the payload is a serialized Python object -- for "error" frames
it should unserialize to a simple string explaining the error.

For "data" frames sent from the daemon to the client, the payload is a
serialized Python object.

**Event connection**

On this connection, all data flows from daemon to client.  "Event" frames
consist of an STX byte, a 2-byte "event code", a payload length encoded as
usual, and the payload being the event data.

For most events, the data is a serialized Python object, except for those where
a lot of raw data has to be transferred, such that serialization is both slow
and unnecessary.  In the Events_ documentation, unserialized transfer of data is
noted where applicable.

Serialization
-------------

Serialization format is Python pickle format 2.

Handshake
---------

First, a client must generate a random 32-byte ID used as the client ID (e.g.
the MD5 of the host name and the current time, or 32 bytes of urandom data).

Open a connection to the server port and send the client ID.  The daemon will
check if the connecting host is allowed to connect, and then send a data frame
with a serialized dictionary with at least the following keys:

* ``daemon_version`` -- the NICOS version string of the daemon (mostly for
  informational purposes in the client)
* ``protocol_version`` -- the version of the daemon protocol: if the version on
  client side doesn't match, the client should close the connection
* ``pw_hashing`` -- the method of transferring passwords, either 'md5', 'sha1'
  or 'plain'; the client should hash passwords with the given algorithm (except
  if it is 'plain') before sending

The daemon then expects a "authenticate" command with a serialized dictionary,
giving the login name (key "login"), the password (possibly hashed) (key
"passwd") and a string to use as the :envvar:`DISPLAY` environment variable on
the server (key "display").  The latter is mostly obsolete, as it is
incompatible with logins from multiple machines; no value needs to be
transferred.

If the login name and password are accepted, the daemon sends back an "ok" frame
and connection is ready to accept further commands.

At this time, the client can open a second connection to the server port and
send the client ID.  This connection will be detected as the event connection,
and the client can then start receiving event frames on this connection.


Daemon functionality
====================

The daemon operates with several threads: one thread accepts new connections.
Two threads are started per connection: one to receive and handle commands, and
one to send new events (which are pushed to the thread via a Queue).  Another
thread executes user scripts, and a last thread monitors "watch expressions"
that can be set by the clients and are evaluated continuously during runtime.

Execution of code in the "script thread" is subject to a Python trace function,
which means that debugger-like functionality is available: scripts can be
paused, stopped and updated at runtime.


.. _daemon-commands:

Commands
========

These commands can be sent over the command socket.

Script commands
---------------

.. daemoncmd:: queue
.. daemoncmd:: start
.. daemoncmd:: unqueue
.. daemoncmd:: update

Control flow commands
---------------------

.. daemoncmd:: break
.. daemoncmd:: continue
.. daemoncmd:: stop
.. daemoncmd:: emergency

Information requests
--------------------

.. daemoncmd:: getstatus
.. daemoncmd:: getmessages
.. daemoncmd:: getscript
.. daemoncmd:: getdataset
.. daemoncmd:: gettrace

Asynchronous code execution
---------------------------

.. daemoncmd:: exec
.. daemoncmd:: eval
.. daemoncmd:: simulate

Cache interaction
-----------------

.. daemoncmd:: gethistory
.. daemoncmd:: getcachekeys

Watch expressions
-----------------

.. daemoncmd:: watch
.. daemoncmd:: unwatch

Miscellaneous auxiliary commands
--------------------------------

.. daemoncmd:: complete
.. daemoncmd:: eventmask
.. daemoncmd:: getversion
.. daemoncmd:: transfer

Experimental commands
---------------------

.. daemoncmd:: debug
.. daemoncmd:: debuginput

Terminating a connection
------------------------

.. daemoncmd:: unlock
.. daemoncmd:: quit


.. _daemon-events:

Events
======

These are the events emitted by the daemon and transferred on the event
connection.  The data is serialized (using pickle, see Serialization_) unless
noted.

The possible events are listed in the `nicos.protocols.daemon.DAEMON_EVENTS`
dictionary, which maps the event name to a boolean indicating whether event data
for this event should be serialized.

.. daemonevt:: message

   A new log message has been emitted.

   :arg: The new message, as a list with the following members:

      - source logger name
      - message time as Unix timestamp
      - message level as a number
      - message text
      - exception traceback if present
      - message prefix (normally empty, but can be selected different for
        dry-run output, see `simulate`)

.. daemonevt:: request

   A new request has been sent to the daemon by some client.  Requests are
   generated either by new scripts to execute (via `queue`) or by calling
   emergency stop while no script is running.

   This event means that the request has been queued, but is not yet being
   executed (see `processed` below).

   Each request has a request number, which is used to identify the request in
   subsequent commands (e.g. to cancel the request) or events.

   :arg: The request as a dictionary.  The dictionary contents depend on the
      request type:

      - all requests have ``'reqno'`` (request number) and ``'user'`` (user name
        who originated the request) keys
      - script requests also have ``'name''`` (script name/filename) and
        ``'script'`` (code to execute) keys

.. daemonevt:: processing

   A request is now being processed.

   :arg: The request as a dictionary, see above.

.. daemonevt:: blocked

   One or more requests have been blocked from execution.

   :arg: A list of request numbers.

.. daemonevt:: status

   The status of the executing script changed.

   :arg: A tuple of (status constant, line number).  Status constants are
      defined in `nicos.protocols.daemon`:

      - ``STATUS_IDLE`` -- nothing is running
      - ``STATUS_IDLEEXC`` -- nothing is running, and last script raised an
        unhandled exception
      - ``STATUS_RUNNING`` -- a script is running
      - ``STATUS_INBREAK`` -- execution is currently paused
      - ``STATUS_STOPPING`` -- execution is stopping (the `ControlStop`
        exception has been raised, but not yet propagated to toplevel)

.. daemonevt:: watch

   Watch expressions have changed.

   :arg: A dictionary of watch expression names and their values.

.. daemonevt:: mode

   The session's mode has changed.

   :arg: The new mode (``'master'``, ``'slave'``, ``'simulation'`` or
      ``'maintenance'``).

.. daemonevt:: cache

   A new cache value has arrived.

   :arg: A tuple of ``(timestamp, key, operation, value)``.
      The value is the raw cache value, for NICOS related values this is a
      repr-stringified value.

      Key expiration and active deletion are signified by either by
      ``operation`` being `~nicos.protocols.cache.OP_TELLOLD` or ``value`` being
      an empty string, respectively (for the ``OP_`` constants see the
      `nicos.protocols.cache` module).

.. daemonevt:: dataset

   A new data set has been created.

   :arg: The `nicos.core.data.BaseDataset` object.

.. daemonevt:: datapoint

   A new point has been added to the dataset.

   :arg: A tuple of sequences: ``(xvalues, yvalues)``.

.. daemonevt:: datacurve

   A new data curve has been added to the dataset.

   :arg: A tuple of ``(curve name, xvalues, yvalues)``.

.. daemonevt:: liveparams

   Set the data parameters for the next `livedata` event.

   :arg: A tuple of ``(tag, filename, dtype, nx, ny, nt, time)``, where

      - ``tag``: an application specific "tag" for the data format
      - ``filename``: (eventual) filename of the data being transferred
      - ``dtype``: data type of each pixel, in numpy format (such as ``<u4``)
      - ``nx``, ``ny``, ``nt``: array dimensions
      - ``time``: the counting time in seconds

.. daemonevt:: livedata

   New live data to display on the client.

   :arg: The data, as an *unserialized* byte string.

.. daemonevt:: simresult

   A dry run/simulation is finished.

   :arg: The result of the dry run as a tuple of (estimated minimum time in
       seconds, dictionary of devices and their moving range).

.. daemonevt:: showhelp

   The user requested help to be shown.

   :arg: A HTML string to be displayed.

.. daemonevt:: clientexec

   The user requested something to be executed on the client side.  This is
   generally a NICOS library function that opens a GUI window, which cannot be
   done on the server side.

   :arg: A tuple of (function name, arg1, ...).

.. daemonevt:: watchdog

   A watchdog warning has been emitted.

   :arg: A tuple of (event type, timestamp, data).

.. daemonevt:: debugging

   Debug mode has been toggled.

   :arg: True or False, whether debug is on or off.

.. daemonevt:: plugplay

   A plug-and-play event has occurred.

   :arg: A tuple of (event type, data, ...)

.. daemonevt:: setup

   New setups have been loaded in the session.

   :arg: A tuple of (all loaded setups, explicitly loaded setups).

.. daemonevt:: device

   Devices have been added/removed in the session.

   :arg: A tuple of (type, device names).

.. daemonevt:: experiment

   The current experiment has been changed.

   :arg: The new proposal string.

Commit message:

daemon/clients: do not show timing when dry run errors out
In that case, it is much more important to point the user to the fact
that there were errors.  The simulated time is not really useful anyway.

Change-Id: Ibfb7b5ba8194baa7895686be7d32e1dea7fd1aeb
Reviewed-on: https://forge.frm2.tum.de/review/11272
Tested-by: JenkinsCodeReview <bjoern_pedersen@frm2.tum.de>
Reviewed-by: Georg Brandl <g.brandl@fz-juelich.de>

doc/source/protocols/daemon.rst, after:

===================
The daemon protocol
===================

Basics
======

The daemon protocol consists of two socket connections: the command connection
and the event connection.  The command connection is used in a request-reply
mode, while the event connection is read-only for the client.

Frame format
------------

**Command connection**

A "request" frame on the command connection begins with the ASCII byte ENQ
(0x5), followed by a 2-byte "command code", and the length of the payload as a
network-order (big-endian) unsigned 32-bit integer.  The payload must be a
serialized Python tuple with the arguments for the command.

A reply frame on the command connection has one of three types: "ok", "error" or
"data".  The first byte selects the type with the ASCII values ACK (0x6), NAK
(0x15) and STX (0x2) respectively.

"ok" frames have no further content; they consist of only one byte.

For "error" and "data" frames, the following four bytes encode the length of the
payload (i.e. frame length excluding first byte and length) as a network-order
unsigned 32-bit integer.

In both cases, the payload is a serialized Python object -- for "error" frames
it should unserialize to a simple string explaining the error.

For "data" frames sent from the daemon to the client, the payload is a
serialized Python object.

**Event connection**

On this connection, all data flows from daemon to client.  "Event" frames
consist of an STX byte, a 2-byte "event code", a payload length encoded as
usual, and the payload being the event data.

For most events, the data is a serialized Python object, except for those where
a lot of raw data has to be transferred, such that serialization is both slow
and unnecessary.  In the Events_ documentation, unserialized transfer of data is
noted where applicable.

Serialization
-------------

Serialization format is Python pickle format 2.

Handshake
---------

First, a client must generate a random 32-byte ID used as the client ID (e.g.
the MD5 of the host name and the current time, or 32 bytes of urandom data).

Open a connection to the server port and send the client ID.  The daemon will
check if the connecting host is allowed to connect, and then send a data frame
with a serialized dictionary with at least the following keys:

* ``daemon_version`` -- the NICOS version string of the daemon (mostly for
  informational purposes in the client)
* ``protocol_version`` -- the version of the daemon protocol: if the version on
  client side doesn't match, the client should close the connection
* ``pw_hashing`` -- the method of transferring passwords, either 'md5', 'sha1'
  or 'plain'; the client should hash passwords with the given algorithm (except
  if it is 'plain') before sending

The daemon then expects a "authenticate" command with a serialized dictionary,
giving the login name (key "login"), the password (possibly hashed) (key
"passwd") and a string to use as the :envvar:`DISPLAY` environment variable on
the server (key "display").  The latter is mostly obsolete, as it is
incompatible with logins from multiple machines; no value needs to be
transferred.

If the login name and password are accepted, the daemon sends back an "ok" frame
and connection is ready to accept further commands.

At this time, the client can open a second connection to the server port and
send the client ID.  This connection will be detected as the event connection,
and the client can then start receiving event frames on this connection.


Daemon functionality
====================

The daemon operates with several threads: one thread accepts new connections.
Two threads are started per connection: one to receive and handle commands, and
one to send new events (which are pushed to the thread via a Queue).  Another
thread executes user scripts, and a last thread monitors "watch expressions"
that can be set by the clients and are evaluated continuously during runtime.

Execution of code in the "script thread" is subject to a Python trace function,
which means that debugger-like functionality is available: scripts can be
paused, stopped and updated at runtime.


.. _daemon-commands:

Commands
========

These commands can be sent over the command socket.

Script commands
---------------

.. daemoncmd:: queue
.. daemoncmd:: start
.. daemoncmd:: unqueue
.. daemoncmd:: update

Control flow commands
---------------------

.. daemoncmd:: break
.. daemoncmd:: continue
.. daemoncmd:: stop
.. daemoncmd:: emergency

Information requests
--------------------

.. daemoncmd:: getstatus
.. daemoncmd:: getmessages
.. daemoncmd:: getscript
.. daemoncmd:: getdataset
.. daemoncmd:: gettrace

Asynchronous code execution
---------------------------

.. daemoncmd:: exec
.. daemoncmd:: eval
.. daemoncmd:: simulate

Cache interaction
-----------------

.. daemoncmd:: gethistory
.. daemoncmd:: getcachekeys

Watch expressions
-----------------

.. daemoncmd:: watch
.. daemoncmd:: unwatch

Miscellaneous auxiliary commands
--------------------------------

.. daemoncmd:: complete
.. daemoncmd:: eventmask
.. daemoncmd:: getversion
.. daemoncmd:: transfer

Experimental commands
---------------------

.. daemoncmd:: debug
.. daemoncmd:: debuginput

Terminating a connection
------------------------

.. daemoncmd:: unlock
.. daemoncmd:: quit


.. _daemon-events:

Events
======

These are the events emitted by the daemon and transferred on the event
connection.  The data is serialized (using pickle, see Serialization_) unless
noted.

The possible events are listed in the `nicos.protocols.daemon.DAEMON_EVENTS`
dictionary, which maps the event name to a boolean indicating whether event data
for this event should be serialized.

.. daemonevt:: message

   A new log message has been emitted.

   :arg: The new message, as a list with the following members:

      - source logger name
      - message time as Unix timestamp
      - message level as a number
      - message text
      - exception traceback if present
      - message prefix (normally empty, but can be selected different for
        dry-run output, see `simulate`)

.. daemonevt:: request

   A new request has been sent to the daemon by some client.  Requests are
   generated either by new scripts to execute (via `queue`) or by calling
   emergency stop while no script is running.

   This event means that the request has been queued, but is not yet being
   executed (see `processed` below).

   Each request has a request number, which is used to identify the request in
   subsequent commands (e.g. to cancel the request) or events.

   :arg: The request as a dictionary.  The dictionary contents depend on the
      request type:

      - all requests have ``'reqno'`` (request number) and ``'user'`` (user name
        who originated the request) keys
      - script requests also have ``'name''`` (script name/filename) and
        ``'script'`` (code to execute) keys

.. daemonevt:: processing

   A request is now being processed.

   :arg: The request as a dictionary, see above.

.. daemonevt:: blocked

   One or more requests have been blocked from execution.

   :arg: A list of request numbers.

.. daemonevt:: status

   The status of the executing script changed.

   :arg: A tuple of (status constant, line number).  Status constants are
      defined in `nicos.protocols.daemon`:

      - ``STATUS_IDLE`` -- nothing is running
      - ``STATUS_IDLEEXC`` -- nothing is running, and last script raised an
        unhandled exception
      - ``STATUS_RUNNING`` -- a script is running
      - ``STATUS_INBREAK`` -- execution is currently paused
      - ``STATUS_STOPPING`` -- execution is stopping (the `ControlStop`
        exception has been raised, but not yet propagated to toplevel)

.. daemonevt:: watch

   Watch expressions have changed.

   :arg: A dictionary of watch expression names and their values.

.. daemonevt:: mode

   The session's mode has changed.

   :arg: The new mode (``'master'``, ``'slave'``, ``'simulation'`` or
      ``'maintenance'``).

.. daemonevt:: cache

   A new cache value has arrived.

   :arg: A tuple of ``(timestamp, key, operation, value)``.
      The value is the raw cache value, for NICOS related values this is a
      repr-stringified value.

      Key expiration and active deletion are signified by either by
      ``operation`` being `~nicos.protocols.cache.OP_TELLOLD` or ``value`` being
      an empty string, respectively (for the ``OP_`` constants see the
      `nicos.protocols.cache` module).

.. daemonevt:: dataset

   A new data set has been created.

   :arg: The `nicos.core.data.BaseDataset` object.

.. daemonevt:: datapoint

   A new point has been added to the dataset.

   :arg: A tuple of sequences: ``(xvalues, yvalues)``.

.. daemonevt:: datacurve

   A new data curve has been added to the dataset.

   :arg: A tuple of ``(curve name, xvalues, yvalues)``.

.. daemonevt:: liveparams

   Set the data parameters for the next `livedata` event.

   :arg: A tuple of ``(tag, filename, dtype, nx, ny, nt, time)``, where

      - ``tag``: an application specific "tag" for the data format
      - ``filename``: (eventual) filename of the data being transferred
      - ``dtype``: data type of each pixel, in numpy format (such as ``<u4``)
      - ``nx``, ``ny``, ``nt``: array dimensions
      - ``time``: the counting time in seconds

.. daemonevt:: livedata

   New live data to display on the client.

   :arg: The data, as an *unserialized* byte string.

.. daemonevt:: simresult

   A dry run/simulation is finished.

   :arg: The result of the dry run as a tuple of (estimated minimum time in
       seconds, dictionary of devices and their moving range).

       If an exception occurred during simulation, the minimum time returned
       is -1.

.. daemonevt:: showhelp

   The user requested help to be shown.

   :arg: A HTML string to be displayed.

.. daemonevt:: clientexec

   The user requested something to be executed on the client side.  This is
   generally a NICOS library function that opens a GUI window, which cannot be
   done on the server side.

   :arg: A tuple of (function name, arg1, ...).

.. daemonevt:: watchdog

   A watchdog warning has been emitted.

   :arg: A tuple of (event type, timestamp, data).

.. daemonevt:: debugging

   Debug mode has been toggled.

   :arg: True or False, whether debug is on or off.

.. daemonevt:: plugplay

   A plug-and-play event has occurred.

   :arg: A tuple of (event type, data, ...)

.. daemonevt:: setup

   New setups have been loaded in the session.

   :arg: A tuple of (all loaded setups, explicitly loaded setups).

.. daemonevt:: device

   Devices have been added/removed in the session.

   :arg: A tuple of (type, device names).

.. daemonevt:: experiment

   The current experiment has been changed.

   :arg: The new proposal string.
